#summary Development Roadmap for Signal/Collect
#labels Phase-Requirements

*All dates are subject to change.*

=Java/Bugfix Release 1.1=
To be released on November 19th, 2011
  * [http://code.google.com/p/signal-collect/wiki/JavaExampleAlgorithm Added Java support]
  * Changed implementation of factory objects, execution mode objects and termination reason objects to make access from Java straightforward and moved them to the package com.signalcollect.configuration
  * Issue 45 `Graph.forVertexWithId` is much faster now, but doesn't guarantee that all graph modifications have been executed on the vertex yet. To get the old semantics, call `Graph.awaitIdle()` first.
  * Issue 46 `GraphEditor` can be used concurrently now, which allows parallel graph loading (for example using parallel collections).
  * Issue 47 `ExecutionInformation.graphLoadingWaitInMilliseconds` was renamed to `ExecutionInformation.graphIdleWaitingTimeInMilliseconds`, because this wait might have other reasons than waiting for the graph to load.
  * Issue 48 The reported `ExecutionInformation.graphLoadingWaitInMilliseconds` was wrong. Bug fixed (field was also renamed).
  * Issue 49 `DefaultEdgeId` now caches its `hashCode`. This uses more memory but saves CPU time.
  * Issue 50 `ExecutionInformation` now has an additional field `totalExecutionTimeInMilliseconds`, which measures  the total algorithm execution time comprised of idle waiting, garbage collection and computation time.
  * Issue 51 Added @specialized Annotations to `Vertex`/`Edge`, this improves performance when when using primitives as `id`/`signal`.
  * Issue 52 Using `ConcurrentHashMap` with concurrency level of 1 within the worker, which saves memory compared to the default.
  * Added a Java implementation of the `IdStateAggregator` called `IdStateJavaAggregator` (duh!)

=Features Release 1.2=
Planned for January 2012
  * Issue 24
  * Issue 26
  * Issue 29
  * Issue 43

=Distributed Version 2.0=
Planned for March 2012, depends on release of Akka 2.0
  * Distributed using Akka 2.0
  * Issue 44